BPT Oracles (supporting BPT as Collateral) (#289)
balancer/docs-v3: docs/concepts/core-concepts/bpt-oracles/bpt-oracles.md

## Overview

Instead of using the actual balances to derive the overall price, Balancer BPT oracles compute _theoretical_ balances which satisfy two constraints:

* The "pool constraint": the theoretical balance invariant must equal the real balance invariant, so that the value of the pool is equivalent and can legitimately be scaled by the supply.
* The "price constraint": the token prices derived from the theoretical balances must be proportional to the oracle prices, so that the internal token prices correctly reflect the current state of the market.

We begin with a system of n+1 equations: n "gradient" equations (relating the internal prices to the oracle prices), plus the invariant equation. So, that's n+1 equations with n unknowns: the theoretical token balances we are trying to find. We can linearize the gradient equations by introducing k̃, a sort of scaling factor that converts internal to external prices. Since by definition the prices are proportional, we can define k̃ as this constant of proportionality.

We can then solve this system of linear gradient equations, and express the theoretical balances xⱼ in terms of k̃.

> Then the real magic happens - we can substitute those xⱼ expressions into the invariant equation, and reduce the system to a single equation in k̃. On chain, this equation can be solved using Newton's method. Once we have k̃, we can compute the theoretical balances, sum the product of each token balance and oracle price to get the total pool value, then divide by the total supply to derive the final BPT price.

Reviewer: This part is only appliable to Stable Oracles, not Weighted ot E-CLPs, so it probably should be removed from the general section

See [this page](./bpt-oracles-contracts.md) for references to the BPT Oracle contracts.

> ## Derivation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Stable Pools
```

To match the pattern of the next section, which is `Weighted Pools`

Also, I'd add the part of Stable Pools that is currently in "Overview" here.

TVL = k × Π((Pᵢ/Wᵢ)^Wᵢ) in one step.

In particular, "mapping" the weighted pool solution onto the equivalent terms used above:

* The theoretical balances x̃ᵢ = (TVL × Wᵢ)/Pᵢ, where TVL is the total pool value (referred to as Bᵢ in the WeightedLPOracle code docs).
* The Weighted invariant D = Π(Bᵢ^Wᵢ), computed directly using theoretical balances and weights (referred to as k in the WeightedLPOracle code docs).
* The scaling parameter k̃ is in the Weighted case simply equal to the TVL (C in the code docs).

So, positing a normalization constant C such that C = (Pᵢ × Bᵢ / Wᵢ) for every token, the gradient "price constraint" is:

Bᵢ = (C × Wᵢ)/Pᵢ

We can then substitute this directly into the invariant (no complex polynomials here):

D = Π((C × Wᵢ/Pᵢ)^Wᵢ) = C × Π((Wᵢ/Pᵢ)^Wᵢ)

And then solve for C directly:

C = k × Π((Pᵢ/Wᵢ)^Wᵢ) = TVL = Total pool value

The price is then simply TVL / totalSupply.

## References

See the [contracts](./bpt-oracles-contracts.md) page for practical examples of using the oracles.

> For a more detailed mathematical description of how this is applied to Stable Pools, see the [Pricing Stable Pool BPTs](https://github.com/balancer/balancer-v3-monorepo/blob/main/pkg/standalone-utils/docs/StableOracle.md) document in the V3 monorepo.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a more detailed mathematical description of how this is applied to Stable Pools, see the [Pricing Stable Pool BPTs](https://github.com/balancer/balancer-v3-monorepo/blob/main/pkg/oracles/docs/StableOracle.md) document in the V3 monorepo.
```

> True math nerds can review the [Pricing StableSwap pools](https://github.com/balancer/balancer-v3-monorepo/blob/main/pkg/standalone-utils/docs/pricing_stableSwap_pools.pdf) paper by Sergio A. Yuhjtman, our resident mathematician.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
True math nerds can review the [Pricing StableSwap pools](https://github.com/balancer/balancer-v3-monorepo/blob/main/pkg/oracles/docs/pricing_stableSwap_pools.pdf) paper by Sergio A. Yuhjtman, our resident mathematician.
```
